So we're here to talk about some new
technologies in Leopard Server and
Leopard Client related to calendaring.
And I want to first talk a
little bit about what we've
done with Mac OS X in the past.
Mac OS X and Mac OS X Server related to
collaboration technologies in the past.
So, we've got a great mail client.
We have a great mail server
with CyberSciMap and PostFix.
We've always had the Finder,
which was able to support numerous
file services such as AFP,
SMB, and WebDAV.
With instant messaging, we support AIM.
Last year with Tiger,
we added Jabber support to
both the client and the server.
We've got Safari,
which is a great web browser.
Apache for serving up the web content.
And starting with Leopard,
we now have Teams,
which serves up a bunch
of interesting content.
But we've always had this hole
in the space of calendaring.
We had a great client,
but it didn't really
have a server to talk to,
and it didn't really have the
collaborative features built into it.
And Leopard is changing that.
We're adding iCal Server.
So I've been introduced to
you about four times now,
but I'm introducing it one more time.
So I want to talk about
four major things.
I want to talk a little
bit about the features.
I want to talk about the
standards it's based on.
And talk a little bit about the
integration with Mac OS X Server,
and then talk about how
we can scale the server.
So starting off with features,
most of you, I'm sure,
use calendar servers of some sort,
whether it's Exchange or Meeting Maker or
any of the other servers out there.
iCal Server and iCal support all of the
features you would expect us to support.
So we support multiple calendars,
which allows you to organize your
calendars into different categories.
Of course, you can invite people.
It would be uninteresting
if you couldn't.
You can browse free/busy,
find out when people are busy so
you can find the proper time for
scheduling a meeting or an event.
And of course,
you can invite rooms and resources.
So if you can't invite a room,
it can be very difficult,
especially in Seattle,
where it rains a lot.
Resources allow you to do things
like invite projectors to a room.
If you've got a projector that
moves around from room to room.
And we have full open
directory integration,
which means that all of the users
that are in your directory system
already will just automatically
work with the new iCal Server.
[Transcript missing]
Excellent, excellent.
Well, first I'd like to thank
you all for coming.
I'm Mike Hay.
This is Scott Adler.
We'd like to show you some of the
new things we've been doing in iCal.
Before we show you the new stuff,
let me just run through iCal for those
of you who might not have seen it before
or may not be comfortable with it.
iCal is Apple's calendar app,
ships on every Mac, ships with the OS,
best known for its bright colors
and its multiple calendars.
As you can see over here on the left,
we have multiple calendars.
We actually have groups of calendars.
We'll get back to that in a second.
You can see how all the different
events show up in different views.
That's not a very interesting week.
Got different days.
Let me go back to this month
because that's what you care about.
There we go.
So we can do banners.
We can do all the stuff
you'd probably expect.
If I drill down to any given day,
you get a nice concise view of the day.
If I drill down to, let's say, any event,
we actually allow a lot of information
to be placed on the events.
So we can have a title, a location,
as abstract as you want that to be,
date and time, obviously,
which calendar it's in,
and driving directions,
which I pasted in from an email.
So we can have a title, a location,
Let me go back to the
month view for a second.
So iCal is very easy to use
and it's had a lot of success.
You can very easily change your calendar.
If I decide, for instance,
I want to do these
chores a week in advance,
I just drag and drop,
and the event moves,
and the time changes.
It's very easy.
I can also show different calendars.
I can kind of wean down to just
one calendar view or the other.
The interesting thing,
and you might have asked yourself before,
why does Apple put "I"
in front of everything?
Well, in our case,
we can actually tell you.
We are the Internet Calendar app.
So you can actually publish your
calendars to the Internet or
subscribe to other person's calendars.
Let me go to Safari for a moment
and show you how that works.
So if you have a calendar that you'd
like to share with other people,
you can very simply
put it up on a website,
just have a link that
other people can click on.
And when they click that,
it will launch that URL straight
into iCal and you can very
easily subscribe to it.
I get a chance to rename it
if I'd like to rename it.
I can strip out things that
I might not want in my calendar,
say "OK," and then it shows up over
here in the calendar list with the rest.
I can go through.
And I can change the color if I want.
I'm picky, so I always do that.
I can get rid of these other calendars,
so you can see just this calendar,
and this shows us the moon phases,
which is kind of an interesting thing.
So, more interesting to this
crowd is obviously CalDAV.
We've built the CalDAV support
right into iCal.
So, CalDAV looks just like
everything else in iCal,
works just like everything else in iCal.
Calendars from the same account
are grouped together so that
you can organize them better,
but otherwise the appearance and
the behavior is pretty much the
same as everything else in iCal.
So, now that you're a little
bit more familiar with iCal,
let's take a closer look at the iCal
features that have to do with CalDAV.
Scott?
Okay.
So, let's go to my account here,
and I'll go to my work account.
So, you saw Mike's account have all
the CalDAV information in it,
so, and you might have seen some of
this in Red's demo yesterday if
you were at the server overview,
but we've added this accounts pane
because you could have multiple
CalDAV accounts on different servers,
and I'm going to use
my Apple account here.
And what we're going to do right now
is to use the open directory server.
So, all I need to do is add my
username and my password.
And I'm going to use
my Apple account here.
And what we're going to do right now
is to use the open directory server.
And once I hit tab,
it's going to go out to open directory,
get my full server user address,
and then in the background it's
going to start loading everything
and pulling down all my calendars.
So, what it's actually done right now,
this account didn't know anything about,
this machine didn't know
anything about the CalDAV server,
it just had the open directory
server in my open directory list.
So, it now went,
detected all my calendars,
and you can see I have a
whole bunch of calendars here
that I have up on the server,
and I've already have events in
them because I've been using this.
This is my work account.
So, I have my, and I have all these
different things grouped.
So, one of the things that we can
do here is that I can create
new calendars on the server.
So, we've modified this so it knows the
difference between local and accounts.
So, I'm going to say I want to make
a new calendar up on the server.
And I can create a new calendar and
I can call this WAC demo calendar.
And I can create another
one and I can call this.
Meetings with developers.
And I can add things to them.
So, if I'm going to make a meeting here,
I could just create something.
I'm going to have a meeting with
some developer who is not going to,
who's going to still be here on Friday,
let's say.
So, I can make a new meeting here.
And I can also just,
if I don't like these,
I can just delete these calendars.
And it's all just going up on the server.
And that's what you'd expect.
That's the thing about CalDev
is everything in here is
exactly what you'd expect.
It's just stored off on the server.
So, the big thing about this
is it's all running on DAV.
And since iCal already had
some DAV support in it,
we just built on top of that.
And it's all using HTTP.
You might have heard
something about that earlier.
So, it's very well understood protocols.
So, that's really cool.
And I have this on my work machine.
But let's say I go home.
If I go to my home machine,
the important thing here is that
I just can do the same account setup.
At home, let's say this is Apple work.
And...
here, and then just my password,
and does the exact same thing, goes out,
detects my calendars,
sees the new ones I created,
including the WWC demo.
It knows the colors that
I've set on the calendars,
all the changes.
So it's really important that you get
the exact same data in both places
and you don't need to use sync.
You just, it's,
the truth is up on the server.
So that's the big thing with
CalDev is that you have one
place for all of your data.
You could also get to this
from other clients too,
but we're showing how this works in iCal.
So that's great,
and you might be wondering why did
it take two of us to demo CalDev.
Well,
that's because one of the great features
of CalDev is the scheduling spec.
So there's a draft spec for
scheduling support in CalDev,
and we've implemented that spec.
So I can make a, let's say I want to do a
lunch meeting with somebody,
I don't know who,
so let's go to this and let's
say I'm going to do lunch here,
and I'm going
Lunch, and we'll go to my favorite place,
the Zuni Cafe.
Don't all go there
because I like it so much.
Oops.
Yeah, that's fine.
So I'm going to go to lunch,
and let's see who I'm going to invite.
And I'll invite Mike.
That's great.
And it'll go off to the server,
and it'll ask for a free busy report.
And if you see here, I can zoom in on it,
there's a little slash
next to Mike's name,
which means he's not available.
So that's kind of a bummer,
but I really want to
go to lunch with Mike.
So I'll just move this to tomorrow,
and I'll see that he's available.
And then all I have to do
is send the invitation,
and the server takes care of the rest.
Great.
So let's take a look at the
invitation that you receive when
somebody invites you to a meeting.
Go back to my machine.
And--
What we'll notice if we show the
doc is that iCal has this little
notification that tells me there's
something that needs my attention.
There's also a little indication over
here and little indication over here that
shows me that there's something there.
Let me take a look at
those notifications.
Now I see that there's a
lunch invitation from Scott,
and things are a little busy,
so let me turn off a couple of
these calendars so I can see a
little bit better what's going on.
Luckily, lunch does not conflict with
my drinks with the iCal team.
Let me go back here, click on that.
Let's look at that in the week view.
So you can see in the invitation
in the inspector over here,
I can choose to accept
the meeting or refuse.
I'll accept.
I can choose which calendar
I'd like this to go into.
I'm actually going to put
this into the iCal calendar.
You'll also notice that the
event blocks out space in my
calendar so I can tell where or
when this event would take place.
So I'll just go ahead and accept this.
And you see it's added to my calendar,
the notification goes away,
works pretty smoothly.
Okay,
so if we go to back to my account here.
and you'll see I also get a
notification that Mike's replied.
I can click on this event
and it brings it up in the
inspector and it says that yes,
Mike has replied and all I have to do
is just say okay and it gets rid of
the notification and there we go we
just have to meet tomorrow for lunch.
There's a couple more subtle
clues that you can use.
If you want to stay in one view or
another you can see there's a little
check mark next to the person there
that shows that all the attendees
have replied and you can see there are
different icons depending on the status
that show up over here in the inspector.
Let's go to a more real world example.
I'm sure many of you in a work
environment will actually not
just invite one person to lunch,
you'll actually create a meeting
with a lot of different people.
So let's turn a couple of these
back on so I know what I'm
doing and let me schedule a
dinner with the whole iCal team.
Since we're all up in the city
this will be kind of novel.
So we'll go in and
Make a dinner event.
I'm not really sure
where we're going to eat,
so I'll leave that blank for now.
And since there are many
people I want to invite,
let me just show you our people picker.
As Scott mentioned earlier,
we're integrated with Open Directory,
so I can just go here,
and I get a list of everybody
who's on our Open Directory server.
And then in iCal,
I can simply go through and
drag people into the meeting.
and they'll get added one by one.
And you'll notice as Mike's adding them,
they've got a little
spinning cursor next to them,
which is them checking the free/busy,
and then it'll go away if they're
available or if they weren't available.
[Transcript missing]
I'll get an invitation and I can see all
the people on the team who are invited.
I can see Mike organized it
and I'll just move it into,
I'll say I'll accept this and I'll put
it into my meals calendar and reply.
So following on the theme of this
is a more real world example,
in the time that it took Scott to reply,
I've actually called the restaurant,
figured out where we're going to go.
Go back to my machine, just for kicks.
Called the restaurant,
figured out where we're going to go.
We're going to go to Buca di Beppo.
And we've got a reservation and they
told me on the phone that they won't
actually seat us until everyone's there.
So let me just add a note here.
Maybe we need a spell
checker in the notes field.
And I'll send that out.
And now everyone who I've invited,
as you notice here,
the icons have all changed.
Let me zoom in a little bit.
To show that I've sent an update.
So everyone now has an update
waiting for them to tell them that
the meeting has changed slightly.
So if you go back to my home calendar,
you'll see I get an
update to the meeting,
and also over here in yellow,
all the things that have been
updated are highlighted for me.
So I can see if there
are new attendees added,
we'll get that.
[Transcript missing]
So what I wanted to show you,
just in closing here,
was I can even subscribe to my
calendar from my Tiger machine.
So over here,
I happen to have the URLs to the server.
And I can just go in with
the existing version of iCal.
and just like the other
calendar that I subscribe to,
I can rename it if I like,
I can strip things out if I wanted to.
But as you see,
I can access these calendars that are
up on the CalDAV Server even from older
clients or from other clients that
simply support publication and subscribe.
So we think this is going
to be a really big deal.
There's one more thing
we wanted to mention,
which is in Steve's
talk yesterday morning,
he mentioned that
there's a to-do service.
There's also a full event service that
goes along with that to-do service.
If we go back to my home calendar here,
one of the things that we have is
that this entire API that lets you
get to all of our calendar data,
so the calendar store framework,
lets you get to all the data that
people currently have on their machines,
and also it'll let you get to all the
CalDev data that people are downloading
when they connect to their server.
That data will be available just
like everything else on your system,
and there's great APIs for you guys
to build applications for with these.
We use it internally.
We use it for mail, you saw,
with all the to-do features,
and also the new calendar widget.
If I bring up this,
it has another pane here that shows
all of my upcoming events here.
So this is...
and if you notice these events are
things that are up on the CalDAV server.
Some of them might be local too,
but it's just the way the calendar
widget shows it shows everything for me.
So there's a session on this
today at 3:30 in the Presidio,
so please come to that session
and thank you very much.
Back to you Chris.
Thanks Chris.
Great demo.
Do you guys actually have two
machines that work when you're... or
do you guys have to work like that?
So I want to talk about
standards a little bit.
One of the things we try to be very,
very careful about with
Mac OS X Server is that we don't
use proprietary technologies.
We like to use open standards.
And if you look at some of
the services in 10 Server,
it's very clear that we've been
doing a very good job of that.
So of course,
we adopted a standard for calendaring.
There have been attempts to
create standards in the past.
Probably the most famous one
is Calendar Access Protocol.
And it's sort of the older,
ill-behaved brother of CalDAV, I guess.
It just never really grew up.
Didn't really get along
well with other people.
Just kind of stunted.
Problem with it is that it tried
to do everything from scratch.
It created this very,
very complex protocol.
Maybe one or two people adopted it.
I'm not sure if anybody ever adopted it.
And this lasted for
like six or seven years.
So it was not good.
So we looked at that and decided that
really wasn't where we wanted to go.
CalDAV, on the other hand,
is built on top of a bunch of
protocols that already exist.
And that's a good thing.
So here are some of the
protocols it's built on top of.
You'll notice that all of these
things have RFCs attached to them.
iCalendar, that's the file format
that describes events.
iTip is an extension to iCalendar
that adds the ability to do
things like invite people,
just to the data format.
HTTP, probably the most popular
protocol in the world right now.
WebDAV, which was designed for allowing
collaborative document editing in HTTP,
has also been used for other things,
such as file servers, like at .mac.
And what it basically does is it
adds kind of a data model to WebDAV.
It adds collections,
which are the equivalent of
directories in a file system.
Gives you a couple of new methods.
You can copy files between directories,
move files between directories.
And really importantly,
it adds metadata to those files.
So you can attach metadata,
which is actually really important when
it comes to trying to do calendaring.
And a couple of other lesser
known standards are the
WebDAV access control protocol.
So that's what we use for
providing access controls on all
of the events in the calendar.
And there's another WebDAV standard
called Delta V which is
their version control.
We just stole one of their methods,
which didn't steal.
CalDAV takes one of their methods,
which is a report method for allowing
you to do queries against calendar.
So anyway,
we took all of these standards,
which are all very solid standards,
well tested, well used,
put them all together,
added a little bit more to them,
and came up with CalDAV.
CalDAV adds just really
a little bit more.
It adds make calendar method.
So that's a method that tells the server,
please create me a calendar collection.
Adds a schedule method,
which is just a method that says,
I'd like to create a meeting
and send it off to people.
And with the addition of this and
then some semantics for where these
things go and how they get passed
around inside the WebDAV repository,
you end up with CalDAV,
which is built on top of a very,
very solid foundation
of existing standards.
Here's a protocol stack.
So HTTP at the bottom.
Then you've got webDAV on top of that.
iCal under the file
format that we're using.
iTip provides a little bit of
the scheduling sauce we need.
And then CalDAV on top of that.
And then off to the side is
LDAP because iCal Server is completely
integrated with Open Directory or LDAP.
So how does it work?
It's not that complicated.
It's maybe a little more
complicated than five bullets.
But basically,
when a user wants to invite
somebody to a meeting,
they have an inbox and an outbox.
And these are basically
just directories in WebDAV.
So if I want to invite
somebody to a meeting,
my client will drop a
request into my outbox.
The server will pull
that out of the outbox,
look through the list of attendees,
and then make a copy of that event,
and fan it out to each of
the attendees' inboxes.
At that point,
the client on the attendees
machine notices there's
something new in their inbox.
They pick it up,
show the event to the end user.
The end user says, yes, I'll attend.
No, I don't want to attend.
I'll decide later.
And when they're done with that,
their client puts that
event into their outbox.
Server notices something
new in that outbox,
picks it up,
sees that it's a reply to the originator,
puts a copy of that event into
the inbox of the originator.
The originator's client sees that,
picks it up, updates the original event
with the attendees' status.
It's all very simple, isn't it?
And then additionally,
users can be set up to auto-reply.
So some people like to have
their calendars auto-reply if
they've got time available.
Rooms and resources have
to be done this way.
So basically, a room will always reply
yes if it's available,
if it's not being
managed by somebody else.
Somebody else?
I want to show you a little bit about,
or a little bit of the file layout.
So,
Like I said, this is all web-dev based,
so these really are just file
directories and files on the file system.
So, with iCal Server we start off
with a calendar collection that
contains three collections.
One that contains users calendars,
one that contains group calendars,
and one that contains resources.
So,
kind of diving into the user calendar,
you'll see three users here: Cyrus,
Chris, and Wilfredo.
And in my calendar collection,
I have two calendars.
I've got a work calendar
and a home calendar.
Now those calendars are
actually just another directory.
There's nothing really
that special about them.
But inside of them are
very special things,
and those are the events.
And I've got two events in my calendar.
And these events are just
iCalendar files or ICS files,
the same files that iCal's
been using since the beginning.
And kind of a key point to all of this
is you notice an HTTP URL at the top,
right above event number one.
Because we're using web dev,
which is based on HTTP,
every single event is
addressable by a URL.
So even if you're not building
a full calendar client,
you can still do some pretty interesting
things just knowing that you can
get to anything with a unique URL.
Groups are the same structure.
A group will have a calendar.
Groups also have members.
So in this case,
the software group calendar
is accessible by me and Cyrus.
We can both read and write that calendar.
This is useful for when
you're dealing with projects.
And resources,
this is where we put the calendars for
things like rooms and projectors and
other things that don't talk in meetings.
So why did we choose Kite CalDAV?
There are a few reasons.
We actually started looking at
building a calendar server a little
while back and put a bunch of
effort into designing a calendaring
protocol that we wanted to be open.
We were going to, as Apple,
try to create a protocol and push
it out to the world as a standard.
It actually got fairly
far along with that,
and very strange, it was based on WebDAV,
included inboxes and outboxes,
used the iCalendar format,
and then we were probably about a
third of the way through this thing,
and then this thing CalDAV popped up.
It looked just like
what we were working on,
so the timing was absolutely perfect.
We decided rather than go it alone,
we would jump on board with
people designing CalDAV.
Second thing is, as I mentioned,
we like to keep things as
standard in Mac OS X server.
CalDAV's totally open.
It's run being run through
the IETF as an open source.
Open standard.
Third thing is that it's being adopted.
The worst thing to do is to create a new
standard and nobody comes to the party.
Not something we wanted to have happen.
We don't want our product to work just
iCal server and iCal working together.
We want our product to be able to work
with all the different clients out there,
numerous servers out there,
so it's important that
it's being adopted.
We also noticed it was being adopted.
There are people already adopting this.
So Oracle's announced that
they're adopting CalDAV.
Novell with their Hula project
has announced that they're
going to be adopting CalDAV.
So it seemed like everybody
who would in their right mind
adopt an open standard did,
so we decided that would
be a good thing to do.
Then also the future is being
designed into this protocol.
This is not a protocol that's
like very tightly coupled.
It's actually very loosely coupled,
and you can see that based
upon all of the different
protocols that are involved.
One example of this is a group of
the people involved in CalDAV a month
or two ago did an experiment where
they allowed free busy information
to be seen between different
servers from different companies.
And so what this allows
in this experiment is for
somebody from Microsoft,
for example, to invite me to a meeting,
and while they're inviting me,
see my free busy.
That's a pretty important thing,
especially in the university world
where you guys are definitely
a lot more open about letting
people see free busy information.
And the experiment went well.
It wasn't all that difficult
to get the thing working,
and there's actually a technical
committee who's working on completing
this and making it part of the standard.
And the last thing is that CalDAV is
being designed by some people
who are extremely well organized.
A lot of standards are
kind of grassroots.
Efforts by people who are
trying to go through the IETF.
They're not very organized.
They get disorganized.
Things fall apart.
One guy becomes a bad guy.
The good guys all quit.
And that sort of thing.
CalDAV doesn't really have that problem.
It's being designed primarily by a
group of people who are members of
an organization called CalConnect.
And CalConnect is doing a great job
of getting the standard defined and
then pushing it over to the IETF.
So they're fast tracking that way.
And they avoid a lot of the
problems you have with IETF.
And to speak about CalConnect,
I'd like to invite Dave Thewlis,
who is the executive
director of CalConnect.
Thank you.
Yesterday I couldn't
figure out how to use this,
so I was technology
challenged from the start.
As Chris said,
I'm the Executive Director of CalConnect,
which is the calendaring
and scheduling consortium.
And I'll talk just a little bit about
what it is and what we're about,
and then I'm going to go into a
little bit more detail about the
things that we're actually doing.
CalConnect is an information
technology consortium.
It is actually a 501c3 nonprofit.
We tend to think of it,
or I tend to think of it,
as a partnership between
developers and customers.
We have a variety of
different types of members,
as you'll see,
but it's a very collegial organization.
And people who are actually developers
from vendors or other organizations that
are developing calendar applications,
and people from customers and users
that are actually users of these things,
are working together to help evolve
the specifications and help do
interoperability testing and such things.
Our mission, although it has a lot
of fancy words in it,
boils down to the fact that
we are dedicated to driving
interoperability between different
calendaring and scheduling systems.
To that end, we develop requirements.
We develop requirements and
use cases for standards.
We help to evolve changes to
standards to support calendaring.
We also provide a place where work
on the specifications can happen
between individuals and organizations,
and then the specification can
be furthered into the IETF or
conceivably another standards body,
if that's the appropriate
thing to do with it.
We definitely conduct interoperability
testing either between existing
systems or interoperability testing
against the RFCs to ensure that
the specifications are done correctly.
And that the specifications
are properly implemented.
And in a sense,
what we're trying to do is to push
the industry towards interoperability.
Calendaring up to now,
especially in organizations,
has largely been a case
of individual islands.
Some proprietary server and the
clients associated with that.
So you can do calendaring
within your organization,
but you can't do it between
your organization and another.
Frequently, even if it's the same system,
and very definitely if
it's different ones.
And our goal is to make sure that,
calendaring systems can interoperate
and that calendaring for
individual people can interoperate.
As far as who's involved in CalConnect,
calendaring vendors such as,
Chris mentioned Oracle and Novell,
both of whom are members.
Academia,
many major universities that are
heavily involved in calendaring are
now members of the organization.
Commercial companies,
we're starting to get membership
from organizations such as Boeing.
Open source developers,
governmental entities, NGOs, individuals.
This is an incomplete slide,
but it does show many of the members
and as was announced yesterday,
and I was here to welcome
Apple to CalConnect.
Now the reality is that Apple has been
a member of CalConnect since January,
has been heavily involved in work on
the CalDAO standard and other evolving
work that's going on within CalConnect.
[Transcript missing]
Chris alluded to the Free/Busy
proof of concept demo.
This was conducted by CalConnect.
And it was actually
about three weeks ago.
What we demonstrated was collection
of Free/Busy data from seven
different calendaring systems,
which included, as it happened,
Microsoft Exchange, Lotus Notes,
and several CalConnect-- sorry,
CalDAV implementations.
The core of this was a Free/Busy
aggregator based on CalDAV.
It was a CalDAV implementation
from beadwork,
which is Rensselaer Polytech's open
source implementation of CalDAV.
And then CalDAV proxies with connectors
to non-CalDAV proprietary servers,
such as the Domino's server
and the Exchange server.
In fact, Boeing provided the connector
for the Exchange server.
And IBM provided the connector
for the Notes server.
So we were able to draw Free/Busy data
from these seven different servers,
one of which was Google Calendar,
and display it all in a summary
through a web interface.
And being able to go on that
then to start scheduling data.
And this was in response to a challenge,
actually, from another standards
organization called the Open Group.
One of their members, Boeing,
was desperate for some way to do
Free/Busy analysis across people in
about 2,000 member organizations,
member partner companies.
They're spread all over the world.
And they figured that they lose an
enormous amount of time just trying to
figure out when everybody's available
for a meeting or a conference call.
So they didn't even care whether they
could do automated scheduling if they
could just do the Free/Busy lookup.
And all of that work is in open source.
That will all be made available by
Rensselaer Polytech for anyone to
pick up and work on if they want.
I mentioned our technical committees.
Right now we have eight
active technical committees.
They're working on authentication
and related to that the discovery
issues of being able to figure out
what somebody's calendar ID is if
they're not on your own server.
CalDAV, which is,
and Chris alluded to this also,
CalDAV is directly working on providing
use cases and requirements for the
specifications that are then being
developed by the primary developers
of the specs that will then go as
the CalDAV submissions into the
IETF and all three of the primary
authors are active in CalConnect
and active in the CalDAV technical
committee plus some other people.
The event publication technical committee
is working on extensions to iCalendar
to support real event publication.
We're talking about things like
concerts where there's a lot of
additional information you would
like to carry along with an event
and that kind of information varies
depending upon the kind of event it is.
What you'd want to provide for a
baseball game would differ from a
rock concert would differ from a
speech being given at a university.
So, and native iCalendar doesn't provide
enough flexibility and enough granularity
to describe these kinds of things.
So they're working on what will
be submitted very shortly now
to the IETF as a specification
for an extension to iCalendar.
TC Freebusy is the technical committee
that put together the demo that we talked
about and is going to be working on
expanding that demo to include a new one.
We're expanding that demo to include
all of the vendors that are members
of CalConnect and some others will
be redoing that demo at our next
roundtable which I'll mention shortly.
The IOP test committee of course simply
develops the interop testing events and
standard scripts and things like that
which we make available on our website.
We have a technical committee in
the mobile area which is working
on being able to do calendaring
into mobile devices and we're not
talking about synchronization,
well we're talking about
synchronization here of course.
One of the problems with the sync
being that it's not content sensitive
so you can happily sync something
that your phone can't deal with.
But real calendaring onto
mobile devices in the future.
Real time which is working on
things like the protocols that are
actually required to do things like
synchronous Freebusy determination.
And the use case technical committee
which is primarily involved in developing
the use cases that will be part of
building the specification system.
So in fact the specifications when
done actually can be used to implement
things that meet the requirements
that people actually needed in their
calendaring systems when they have them.
And then I mentioned two
TCs that have just finished.
One which worked on proposed
changes to time zone,
the time zone specifications and one
proposed changes to recurrence as
they currently exist in iCalendar
to simplify these things somewhat
and make them more implementable.
I mentioned I was going to make a
proposal for people to get involved with
us and we have a small organization.
It's relatively new.
It's about 18 months old.
We are growing and we need help.
We need more people that are actively
involved in doing things such as
helping to define the requirements,
making sure that we have the voices
from different kinds of organizations,
from different developers,
from different types of users.
And the points that I make here,
the reason to get involved in
CalConnect is simply that you
can help shape the evolution of
calendaring and both the specifications
and eventually the products,
identifying real world
requirements and use cases.
If your organization has
needs that you're not sure
anybody is really meeting,
and most large organizations are
uncomfortably certain that there
aren't any products that really do
what they actually wanted to do,
this is an opportunity to help
work directly with the developers,
if you're a developer,
it's an opportunity to work
directly with the developers.
And of course,
help drive the rest of the calendar
community towards interoperability.
If you're interested, visit our website,
which is calconnect.org.
I mentioned that we have
three member meetings a year.
Non-members may attend as
observers to see what's going on
and see if they're interested.
As a matter of fact,
our next roundtable is at the
end of September being hosted
by Apple Computer in Cupertino,
or you can email or call
me for more information.
And of course, with everyone else,
I'll be around after the meeting
if anyone wants to talk more.
And thank you very much.
Thank you Dave, and I'd like to second
his plea for you to join.
If you're a developer,
you want to join because you want
to help to define the standard.
You also want to make sure that your
stuff works with everybody else's stuff.
If you're in higher ed,
you want to be there so that you
can let the other people defining
the spec know what it is you need.
Because you can actually help
define the spec so that it meets
the needs of your university.
So, talked a lot about interoperability,
and I'd like to prove that
there's some interoperability,
and I'm going to invite Grant Baillie
and Jeffrey Harris from the
Open Source Applications Foundation to
come up and give you a demo of,
to speak a little bit about OSAF,
and to also do a demo of Chandler
working with the Apple iCal Server.
Thanks, Chris.
So yeah, this is going to be a little
bit of a two-man show.
I'm just going to go through a couple
of slides and then Jeffrey is going
to come up and do the real demo
part of the sub-presentation here.
So, not surprising given who I work for,
the stuff we're showing is an open source
application and its name is Chandler.
I was kind of looking through
these slides and they're
in kind of a funny order,
so I'm going to make a big boo-boo and do
a random walk around the bullet points,
so don't try to follow
too closely at home.
So basically what Chandler is,
is it's a personal information manager.
This is the third bullet point,
by the way.
And what it really is,
is it's a hub for all
your personal information,
calendars, tasks, emails, and notes.
And then there's that nice phrase,
orchestration of shared PIM info.
There the word orchestration points
to the fact that we have this great
communications infrastructure and
these powerful computers that can
accumulate all this information.
But what that really leads
to is people being really
swamped by their information.
And so, you know,
people end up with inboxes with
huge numbers of emails in them.
Emails don't get replied to,
people miss their meetings,
people miss deadlines, stuff like that.
So we're really hoping to kind
of help address that problem.
And the other word in that
phrase that's good is shared.
So, and that really points to the stuff
we get by participating in CalConnect.
That we really would want to
enable people to use the software.
And that's really what
we're trying to do.
We're trying to enable a whole
bunch of different kinds of shared
calendars from just classic group
where scenarios on a single server to,
say, a group of roommates or friends or
people working across companies.
So I'm going to leap back
up to my first bullet point,
which is the stuff we're going
to show is currently in what's
considered an alpha state,
which means that we're
really using it internally.
And amongst other things,
we're running our shared
office calendar on it.
And since it's open source,
you can download it at any point.
But really, we're expecting it to
be beta early in 2007,
which means that it would sort of be
generally usable for the general public.
And then, of course,
the important thing is
that we're cross platform.
So we run on both Mac architectures.
We run on Windows.
And we run on a couple
of different Linuxes.
So actually moving along in
order to the second bullet point.
We are open source.
We're mostly written in Python.
We didn't go write the whole
thing from scratch ourselves.
We leverage a whole bunch of third
party open source Python libraries.
For instance,
to do the cross platform GUI,
there's a library called WX Python.
And also some of our subprojects are
available for use outside of Chandler.
And there are two examples here
which really are kind of the core
of our CalDiv implementation.
Our Zanshin,
which is a high level CalDiv library.
And then VObject,
which is used to read and
write iCalendar format.
And so it turned out when Apple went
to go do their own open source
calendaring server in Python,
they needed an iCalendar library.
And that's the one they ended up using.
In general, Apple's implementation also
lies on top of a third party.
And so we're hoping that they'll
be able to use that as well.
And then we're hoping that they'll
And since we actually use that as well,
we're hoping that there'll be future
opportunities to use one another's code.
Now I'm gonna leap down to
the last point which is that
we also have a CalDAV server.
Its name is Cosmo.
It's kind of a more traditional,
Java-based server.
It supports the base CalDAV spec.
It also supports like being able
to subscribe from Tiger iCal.
And it also has a web front end which
is all that nice AJAX-y goodness
that people seem to like nowadays.
And actually I'm mentioning
that not just as sort of a
shameless plug for our server,
but actually to talk a little bit about
open standards and interoperability.
In general,
more people having more servers is
good in the end for the end user,
for the customer.
It gives them more choice.
The servers in the end all,
servers and clients end up
having different focuses.
And so in general,
you can find something that's
more tuned to what you need.
To get sort of a little biblical,
there's the phrase that
faith without deeds is dead.
In the standards world,
it turns out that, first of all,
standards without
implementation are dead.
And even more importantly,
from the customer choice point of view,
is that implementations without
interoperability are dead.
So we're very,
very happy to be part of CalConnect.
We're very happy in particular to attend
their interoperability testing events,
where basically you can sit down with
all the other vendors and hash out bugs
and code you've recently introduced,
figure out where your interpretations
of the standards differ,
and that kind of thing.
In fact,
the next interoperability event is
being hosted by our good friends
from Apple in about a month's time.
And it would be really good to go there
and to see the server that we've kind
of guessed must exist for quite a while.
And also to have stuff like iCalendar
testing against our CalDev server too.
So that should be really great.
So, for our contact information,
we're at osafoundation.org.
If you want to find out
more about Chandler,
the client,
you can go to chandler.osafoundation.org.
The server Cosmo is at
cosmo.osafoundation.org.
We have various mailing lists,
various public mailing lists.
The one for sort of high-level
product design or for stuff like,
oh, I downloaded it and
I can't get it to launch,
that would be design
at osafoundation.org.
And then there are two developer lists
for the client and server listed there.
Again, they're for more sort
of technical questions.
So that's the end of what I have to say.
And here's Jeffrey.
Thanks, Grant.
Boy, there are a lot of you.
Hi, I'm Jeffrey Harris.
I'm a developer at OSEF.
So this is Chandler.
Now,
you'll notice this is running on Windows,
GASP.
I would have loved to use
OS X instead of Windows,
but they really wanted
us to show it on Windows.
It's much prettier on OS X.
So this is Chandler.
As Grant mentioned, it's a PIM.
Right now what you're looking
at is our dashboard view.
And what we're really focusing
on are the workflows for triaging
lots of different PIM concepts.
So if you look here, this is a task.
And then I also have events.
These little details are icons here.
You can select different things,
and you can make things
be events or tasks,
and they're all heterogeneous
in individual collections.
And you can triage things,
so you can see here that I have three
now events that are green and three later
events that are yellow and a done event.
The idea is that you really want
to focus on the things that you
want in your attention right now.
Part of what we've done is allow you
to have lots of different collections.
So this is my work collection
of things to focus on,
like give this demo.
I also have a home collection.
And you can overlay them
just as you can in iCalm.
And here's everything all together.
Now, this is all fairly textual.
If we wanted to, we could go over to the
little mini calendar here,
and we could say focus
on the apps team meeting.
And we could switch views
over to a calendar view.
You could probably guess that we
were going to have some calendar
instances at the CalDev talk.
So here's our... Here's our
view of the home collection and
the work collection overlaid,
and I'm going to overlay
my choir collection too.
So, one of the things that we can do
is let's say I realize that this
afternoon one of my friends is going
to be at Stump the Experts tonight,
so I'll make a new event
for that and call that...
[Transcript missing]
Let's see, to access it,
I don't have open directory things,
so I have to actually know
username and password to access it.
and there we go.
It's downloading all of the relevant
things and if we go and look at fun,
here it is.
Let's go.
[Transcript missing]
and I'm gonna invite Chris or
someone up to come and demonstrate
that in fact that changed the fund
collection up on the CalDAV Server.
[Transcript missing]
We've actually got this up.
We didn't show it in the
right perspective necessarily,
so let me turn off my other
calendars and show that...
Which week was this in?
Looks like it was July 30th.
July 30th.
Oh, that helped too.
[Transcript missing]
So I want to talk about iCal
Server and its integration with
the rest of Mac OS X Server.
So, as I've mentioned probably twice,
maybe three times already,
we have full integration
with Directory Services,
which means we support Open Directory.
If you've got an
Apple Directory deployment,
Directory Services will
do the mapping for you,
same for LDAP.
You probably can't read
the fine print there,
but that's okay.
No, actually all it says is that there
is one additional attribute you need
to add to your directory schema,
which is basically the address
of the calendar for each user.
We also support Kerberos.
So the client and the server
both support Kerberos.
And like all services on Mac OS X,
we provide a graphical interface
for administering that,
so Server Admin has support for Calendar.
It's very,
very simple to set up right now.
We'll probably add a few more features
before we ship the final version.
For now, that's all we have.
And the new Server Preferences
application supports it as well.
And there's a new application
called Teams Directory,
and Teams Directory does
a few different things.
One is it's basically an
address book for your directory,
so it allows you to browse all
of the users in your directory.
It also allows you to browse
things like rooms and resources,
such as projectors.
And in addition to that,
it also allows you to do things like
create rooms and create projectors
and add maps to those things so
you know where they're located.
And this all integrates directly
with iCal Server and iCal.
And then on the IT front,
we tried to make our data store
as IT friendly as possible.
How many IT people like dealing
with problems when they can't
see what the problem is?
One guy back there.
All right.
So the data,
as you saw in the previous slides,
the data format we're using is actually
just iCalendar files on the disk.
And those are textual files.
If there are problems,
you can go in there and take a look
at them and see what the problem is.
Files by themselves are not very fast.
So we do have a database
that backs that for indexing.
And that's where we get our speed.
But that database can
be thrown in the trash,
and it'll get rebuilt automatically.
We basically use it for performance only.
This creates a very resilient system.
It also allows you to do things
like per account backup and restore.
A lot of calendaring systems
require-- not that there are a lot
of calendaring systems out there,
but most calendaring systems
require that you bring down the
entire calendar server in order
to fix one problem on one account.
iCal Server doesn't require that.
And because the files are
all living there on disk in a
format that is easy to read,
these are all parsable.
You can write your own
tools to manage the files,
to provide status on the files,
to provide statistics on your server.
In general, the whole thing is basically
very easy to troubleshoot.
In addition to that,
the data that's going over
the wire is HTTP and WebDAV,
which gives you the XML and iCalendar.
So it's all very easy to
troubleshoot over the wire.
Of course,
this is all protected with SSL,
but you can disable SSL when
you're trying to troubleshoot
to look for problems.
Let's talk a little
bit about scalability.
So we designed this thing to be
extremely flexible so that you could
scale it the way you want it to scale.
So it can certainly start off
small and grow your organization.
We support a variety of different
configurations in terms of scaling.
Different organizations have
different ways of scaling,
and we understand that.
And because of that,
it makes it very cost efficient
for you to build out your
system when that time comes,
when your organization
gets big enough to do that.
So, if you're a small business,
you can run everything on one server.
Your directory server,
your calendar server, your web server,
your mail server can all
be run on one server.
Get a little bigger, move the mail server
off to another server,
move your directory server
off to another server.
When you start getting bigger,
maybe add some load balancing
hardware in front of the machine,
add more calendar servers,
and when you get as big as
we'd like you all to get,
purchase an XAN.
And hook that up to the calendar servers.
iCal Server can support shared
storage on the back end,
it can support partitioned
storage between servers,
so it's extremely flexible.
Then the last thing I want to talk
about is Darwin Calendar Server.
So, we built, obviously,
we're obviously including a
server with Mac OS X Server,
but we're taking that same
source code and it is identical,
exactly the same source code,
in fact it's the same open source,
or the same subversion repository
that our engineers use,
and we're open sourcing that.
[Transcript missing]
apache license version 2 so that's a
mistake it's not apsl it's actually
an apache license which is a much more
lenient license and as grant mentioned
the server's written in python and
it lives on top of twist the twisted
framework and it lives as a twisted
caldav module it's a new module that's
being added that lives on top of twisted
and it's available today at this um url
and my understanding is that we need a
more powerful server because the server
is getting a little overloaded right
now but feel free to download it anyway
So we're providing a server
that is open sourced,
uses open standards,
and those two together mean
developer opportunities basically,
and I know there are a
lot of developers here.
So I want to encourage you guys
to look at the technologies,
look at the server,
and create some new products
around calendaring and events.
So build clients for mobile devices.
Build some bridges to
legacy calendaring systems.
I won't name the legacy
calendaring systems.
There are too many to name.
Anyway.
But the protocol total, you know,
this standard completely allows that,
and we've actually done a little bit
of experimental work in that area.
No,
we're not doing an Exchange Connector,
so don't read that wrong.
But there is actually an
open source project called
Open Connector that is starting
to do a CalDAV bridge to Exchange,
which is pretty interesting.
If you want to jump on that
project and help them out,
that'd be great.
You can build rich
collaborative websites.
You don't have to deal with
events and calendaring because
iCal Server or Darwin Calendaring
Server already do that for you.
You can focus on the interesting
things in your application
or your interesting web app.
And then for the love of God,
somebody please create a multi-user
project management piece of software.
I'm begging you.
And the first person to do
it in a way that I like,
I will personally buy
you an iPod Shuffle.
And as you guys look at the technologies,
I'm sure you're going to dream
up all sorts of things you can
do with events and calendaring,
knowing that a lot of the work is
already done for you under the hood.
So, let's help the world get it together.
Right?
We see the opportunity for
all sorts of interoperability.
And as Dave mentioned,
we're kind of like,
we're kind of at this point where
mail was when you still had to use
percent signs and dots and didn't
have at signs in your email addresses.
This is where we are
with calendaring now.
And I think in five years,
it's going to be just,
it's going to be expected that
anything that does calendaring
works with CalDAV and iCalendar.